RFC: Oneof Input Objects, Oneof Fields (#825)
graphql/graphql-spec: spec/Section 3 -- Type System.md

         characters {"__"} (two underscores).
      2. The argument must accept a type where {IsInputType(argumentType)}
         returns {true}.
      3. If the field is a Oneof Field:

>          1. The field must be nullable.

Reviewer: I think you mean "The argument" here and on the next line.

Author: Good catch :raised_hands:

      defined in {implementedType}.
      1. Let {field} be that named field on {type}.
      2. Let {implementedField} be that named field on {implementedType}.
      3. {field} must include an argument of the same name for every argument
         defined in {implementedField}.
         1. That named argument on {field} must accept the same type
            (invariant) as that named argument on {implementedField}.
      4. {field} may include additional arguments not defined in
         {implementedField}, but any additional argument must not be required,
         e.g. must not be of a non-nullable type.
      5. {field} must return a type which is equal to or a sub-type of
         (covariant) the return type of {implementedField} field's return type:
         1. Let {fieldType} be the return type of {field}.
         2. Let {implementedFieldType} be the return type of {implementedField}.
         3. {IsValidImplementationFieldType(fieldType, implementedFieldType)}
            must be {true}.

>       6. {field} must be a Oneof Field if and only if {implementedField} is a

Reviewer: This feels kinda awkward, like we're skirting around the idea of having fundamentally different types of fields without really committing to it?

The type of an object field argument must be an input type (any type except an
Object, Interface, or Union type).

**Oneof Fields**

Oneof Fields are a special variant of Object Type fields where the type system
asserts that exactly one of the field's arguments must be set and non-null, all
others being omitted. This is useful for representing situations where an input

> may be one of many different options.

Reviewer: this isn't exactly wrong, but "may" is often an RFC term of art

"must be exactly one of many" is probably clearer and more RFC-y?

> Oneof Fields are a special variant of Object Type fields where the type system
> asserts that exactly one of the field's arguments must be set and non-null, all
> others being omitted. This is useful for representing situations where an input
> may be one of many different options.

Author: ```suggestion
Oneof Fields are a special variant of Object Type fields where the type system
asserts that exactly one of the field's arguments must be set and non-null, all
others being omitted. This is useful for representing situations where a field
can provide many different input options to accomplish the same (or similar)
goal.
```

         characters {"__"} (two underscores).
      2. The argument must accept a type where {IsInputType(argumentType)}
         returns {true}.
      3. If the field is a Oneof Field:

>          1. The field must be nullable.

Reviewer: And here.

which is appropriate for use as an input argument. For this reason, input
objects have a separate type in the system.

**Oneof Input Objects**

Oneof Input Objects are a special variant of Input Objects where the type
system asserts that exactly one of the fields must be set and non-null, all
others being omitted. This is useful for representing situations where an input
may be one of many different options.

When using the type system definition language, the `@oneOf` directive is used
to indicate that an Input Object is a Oneof Input Object (and thus requires
exactly one of its field be provided):

```graphql
input UserUniqueCondition @oneOf {
  id: ID
  username: String
  organizationAndEmail: OrganizationAndEmailInput
}
```

In schema introspection, the `__Type.oneField` field will return {true} for

> Oneof Input Objects, and {false} for all other Input Objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Oneof Input Objects, and {false} for all other types.
```
?

Also what abour returning `null` ? `oneField` is `Boolean` compared to `oneArgument` that is `Boolean!`.

Author: `__Type.oneField` follows the pattern of all other `__Type` fields: it's nullable. The concept of `oneField` doesn't make sense for a union for example, so having `oneField: false` doesn't make sense for a union; hence nullable.

`__Field.oneArgument`, on the other hand, makes sense for all fields, so it's perfectly fine to be required.

Reviewer 2: OK

which is appropriate for use as an input argument. For this reason, input
objects have a separate type in the system.

**OneOf Input Objects**

OneOf Input Objects are a special variant of Input Objects where the type system
asserts that exactly one of the fields must be set and non-null, all others
being omitted. This is useful for representing situations where an input may be
one of many different options.

When using the type system definition language, the `@oneOf` directive is used
to indicate that an Input Object is a OneOf Input Object (and thus requires
exactly one of its field be provided):

```graphql
input UserUniqueCondition @oneOf {
  id: ID
  username: String
  organizationAndEmail: OrganizationAndEmailInput
}
```

> In schema introspection, the `__Type.isOneOf` field will return {true} for OneOf

Reviewer 3: I feel like there is a inconsistency here with the fact that in other cases where a `__Type` field does not apply it is null and not true/false.  eg `possibleTypes` never applies to Scalsrs and hence its null so following that logic,  `isOneOf` never applies to Scalars so it should be null 

> In schema introspection, the `__Type.isOneOf` field will return {true} for OneOf
> Input Objects, and {false} for all other Input Objects.

And in the merged JS implementation we have

```
isOneOf: {
        type: GraphQLBoolean,
        resolve: (type) => {
          if (isInputObjectType(type)) {
            return type.isOneOf;
benjie marked this conversation as resolved.
          }
        },
      },
```

which I think will return null (or undefined maybe) if its not a OneOf Input Object.

Reviewer 3: ps..  I dont think this is a show stopper - but it seems inconsistent to me to other `__Type` fields

Author: You may have misread? It says false for all other **input objects**. It’s null if not an input object (though it doesn’t explicitly state that here, it doesn’t need to and this makes space for oneOf to be applied to other types in future).

Reviewer 3: Thank you for the clarification.

  definition does not provide a default value, the input object field
  definition's default value should be used.

Further, if the input object is a Oneof Input Object, the following additional
rules apply:

* If the input object literal or unordered map does not contain exactly one
  entry, an error must be thrown.

* If the single entry in the input object literal or unordered map is {null},

>   an error must be thrown.

Author: These are already enforced by validation, so I do not know if we need them in coercion. However, if we do not enforce them here then the coercion table below would have different outputs (e.g. `{a: $a, b: $b}` with `{ "a": "abc" }` would be allowed by coercion, but not by validation).

An alternative approach is to keep the above and add a different non-null coerced value rule so we can drop the two rules below (since they'll be implicitly true).

@leebyron what are your thoughts on this?

Reviewer 4: > These are already enforced by validation, so I do not know if we need them in coercion. However, if we do not enforce them here then the coercion table below would have different outputs (e.g. `{a: $a, b: $b}` with `{ "a": "abc" }` would be allowed by coercion, but not by validation).
> 
> An alternative approach is to keep the above and add a different non-null coerced value rule so we can drop the two rules below (since they'll be implicitly true).
> 
> @leebyron what are your thoughts on this?

@benjie @erickessler1

It looks like [the implementing PR for oneof](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3513) tests allows  `{a: $a, b: $b}` with `{ "a": "abc" }` within coercion, only disallowing in validation. The spec changes as understood here by me seem to disallow this within coercion. I am not sure what the desired behavior was decided to be/should be, but just double checking that everything is aligned. :)

Reviewer 4: see https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/4034

Reviewer 4: Bumping this

> * If the coerced unordered map does not contain exactly one entry, an error

Reviewer: 🤔  why do we have basically the same rules twice, once for "unordered map" and once for "coerced unordered map"? Can this be simplified, or are we being explicit about something subtle?

Author: See the [note above regarding validation](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/825/files/bb225f77781adfc23df14e391db5ee4a01d1eb6a#r588879692). These new bullets are _coercion_ (rather than validation) constraints; it's the ones above that we might want to remove.

`{ b: $var }`            | `{ var: null }`         | Error: {b} must be non-null.
`{ b: 123, c: "xyz" }`   | `{}`                    | Error: Unexpected field {c}

Following are examples of input coercion for a Oneof Input Object with a
`String` member field `a` and an `Int` member field `b`:

```graphql example
input ExampleInputTagged @oneOf {
  a: String
  b: Int
}
```

Literal Value            | Variables               | Coerced Value
------------------------ | ----------------------- | ---------------------------
`{ a: "abc", b: 123 }`   | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified
`{ a: null, b: 123 }`    | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified
`{ b: 123 }`             | `{}`                    | `{ b: 123 }`

> `{ a: $var, b: 123 }`    | `{ var: null }`         | Error: Exactly one key must be specified

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/825/files#r583465590

Seems so...  I am asking because until now there has not been a single validation rule requiring the validation of variables, that is, a successful validation of the incoming graphql document clearly spoke of its validity. It was possible to cache this document and not applying all validation rules over and over again. Now this is not the case. Ping @shane32 .

Author: Directly above this block is an extremely similar validation block for regular input objects that also factor in the variables. How can you know if a runtime input object is valid if you don't coerce it?

I think this conversation can be resolved, but I'm leaving it open in case I'm missing something that makes what I'm doing with oneof input objects somehow different to what we're doing with regular input objects.

Reviewer 2: > extremely similar validation block for regular input objects that also factor in the variables. 

@shane32 we need to check it

Author: I'm going to close this as I don't think any changes are required.

`{ a: $var, b: 123 }`    | `{}`                    | `{ b: 123 }`
`{ b: $var }`            | `{ var: 123 }`          | `{ b: 123 }`
`$var`                   | `{ var: { b: 123 } }`   | `{ b: 123 }`
`"abc123"`               | `{}`                    | Error: Incorrect value
`$var`                   | `{ var: "abc123" } }`   | Error: Incorrect value
`{ a: "abc", b: "123" }` | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified
`{ b: "123" }`           | `{}`                    | Error: Incorrect value for member field {b}
`{ a: "abc" }`           | `{}`                    | `{ a: "abc" }`
`{ b: $var }`            | `{}`                    | Error: No keys were specified
`$var`                   | `{ var: { a: "abc" } }` | `{ a: "abc" }`
`{ a: "abc", b: null }`  | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified
`{ b: $var }`            | `{ var: null }`         | Error: Value for member field {b} must be non-null

> `{ b: 123, c: "xyz" }`   | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified

Reviewer: Missing `{ a: $varA, b: $varB}` with various combinations of values for varA and varB.

Reviewer 5: My in meeting proposal was that this case could just be invalid at start.

This L1441 in Validation file in this PR sounds like it would do just that:
https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/825/files#diff-607ee7e6b71821eecadde7d92451b978e8a75e23d596150950799dc5f8afa43eR1441

Author: These are exactly the same as for input objects (which also don't specify what happens if you have multiple variables); but I'll add some for clarity.

Author: @leebyron Good catch; that was not my intent. I have updated the PR with better validation and more examples.

Author: I've since revisited my thoughts on this and for the sake of defining types of variables on the client I've adopted the suggestion: https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/825#issuecomment-791929286

  does not provide a default value, the input object field definition's default
  value should be used.

Further, if the input object is a OneOf Input Object, the following additional
rules apply:

- If the input object literal or unordered map does not contain exactly one
  entry, an error must be thrown.

- If the single entry in the input object literal or unordered map is {null}, an

>   error must be thrown.

Reviewer 6: > or unordered map is {null}, an error must be thrown.

@benjie Does that mean that even if have a nullable arg of one input type, it is still required to pass value?

So if I have:
```graphql
input Options @oneOf {
  foo: String
  bar: Int
}

type Query {
  field(arg: Options): String
}
```
It basically means `arg` became required and following query is invalid:
```
{
  field
}
```

If so, I don't think it's right nullability should be controlled on the arg/input field and not on type as a whole.
Moreover, it changes the definition of required args/fields, previously it was "non-nullable arg/field without default value" now it became "non-nullable arg/field without default value or nullable field of oneOf input object type".

Reviewer 7: Perhaps it means "if the single entry in the unordered map is {null}", rather than "if the unordered map is {null}", which makes more sense...?

Author: Ah; maybe that's ambiguous English? Perhaps you read it as:

> If (the single entry in the input object literal is {null}) or (unordered map is {null}), an error must be thrown.

whereas my intent was:

> If the single entry in (the input object literal or unordered map) is {null}, an error must be thrown.

i.e. if you supply a value for a oneof as either an input object literal (in the document) or an unordered map (i.e. via a variable), then the single entry in it must not be null. If you supply `null` as the argument value, then you are neither supplying an input object literal nor an unordered map.

For the avoidance of doubt, `{field}` is perfectly valid in the scenario you outline, and I agree it would be extremely undesirable were that not the case.

Author: Reworded :+1:

input ExampleInputTagged @oneOf {
  a: String
  b: Int
}
```

Literal Value            | Variables               | Coerced Value
------------------------ | ----------------------- | ---------------------------
`{ a: "abc", b: 123 }`   | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified
`{ a: null, b: 123 }`    | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified
`{ b: 123 }`             | `{}`                    | `{ b: 123 }`
`{ a: $var, b: 123 }`    | `{ var: null }`         | Error: Exactly one key must be specified
`{ a: $var, b: 123 }`    | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified
`{ b: $var }`            | `{ var: 123 }`          | `{ b: 123 }`
`$var`                   | `{ var: { b: 123 } }`   | `{ b: 123 }`
`"abc123"`               | `{}`                    | Error: Incorrect value
`$var`                   | `{ var: "abc123" } }`   | Error: Incorrect value
`{ a: "abc", b: "123" }` | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified
`{ b: "123" }`           | `{}`                    | Error: Incorrect value for member field {b}
`{ a: "abc" }`           | `{}`                    | `{ a: "abc" }`

> `{ b: $var }`            | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified

Reviewer: Looking at this and comparing it to the other lines, I'd expect the error message here to be about the missing value for `$var`; from the literal's perspective exactly one key _was_ specified.

Author: Maybe this should be something like:

```suggestion
`{ b: $var }`            | `{}`                    | Error: Value for member field {b} must be specified
```

In actuality this situation shouldn't be able to occur since validation would enforce that `$var` is required.

`$var`                   | `{ var: { a: "abc" } }` | `{ a: "abc" }`
`{ a: "abc", b: null }`  | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified
`{ b: $var }`            | `{ var: null }`         | Error: Value for member field {b} must be non-null

> `{ b: 123, c: "xyz" }`   | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified

Reviewer 8: In the case of `{ b: 123, c: "xyz" }` wouldn't a type error make more sense the stating that exactly one item must be set. In this case `c` does not exist.

```graphql example
 input ExampleInputTagged @oneOf {
   a: String
   b: Int
 }
 ```

Author: Yeah, I went back and forth between those and ultimately decided that the key count would be faster than the field existence check, but I'm happy doing it the other way around. And in fact the spec text first asserts that the field names are known, so yeah this should change.

Author: Addressed.

> `{ b: 123, c: "xyz" }`   | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified

Author: ```suggestion
`{ b: 123, c: "xyz" }`   | `{}`                    | Error: Unexpected field {c}
```

`{ a: $a, b: $b }`       | `{ a: "abc" }`          | Error: Exactly one key must be specified

**Type Validation**

> 1. An Input Object type must define one or more input fields.

Reviewer 8: Must a oneOf input not at least have two fields to make sense since otherwise, we would essentially have created an input object with a required field. Could be too much validation. Can union types just have one object type?

Author: No, one field is fine. This allows for future expansion; e.g.

```graphql
input UserCriterion @oneof {
  id: ID
}

type Query {
  user(by: UserCriterion!): User
}
```

then later you could add another option as a non-breaking change to the schema:

```graphql
extend input UserCriterion {
  username: String
}
```

Reviewer 8: Makes sense!

| `{ b: $var }`            | `{ var: null }`         | Error: {b} must be non-null.         |
| `{ b: 123, c: "xyz" }`   | `{}`                    | Error: Unexpected field {c}          |

Following are examples of input coercion for a oneOf input object type with a
`String` member field `a` and an `Int` member field `b`:

```graphql example
input ExampleInputTagged @oneOf {
  a: String
  b: Int
}
```

| Literal Value            | Variables               | Coerced Value                                       |
| ------------------------ | ----------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| `{ a: "abc", b: 123 }`   | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |
| `{ a: null, b: 123 }`    | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |

> | `{ b: 123 }`             | `{}`                    | `{ b: 123 }`                                        |

Reviewer 6: I think it would be great to also add `{ a: null }` as an error.

| `$var`                   | `{ var: { b: 123 } }`   | `{ b: 123 }`                                        |
| `"abc123"`               | `{}`                    | Error: Incorrect value                              |
| `$var`                   | `{ var: "abc123" } }`   | Error: Incorrect value                              |
| `{ a: "abc", b: "123" }` | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |
| `{ b: "123" }`           | `{}`                    | Error: Incorrect value for member field {b}         |
| `{ a: "abc" }`           | `{}`                    | `{ a: "abc" }`                                      |
| `{ b: $var }`            | `{}`                    | Error: Value for member field {b} must be specified |
| `$var`                   | `{ var: { a: "abc" } }` | `{ a: "abc" }`                                      |
| `{ a: "abc", b: null }`  | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |
| `{ b: $var }`            | `{ var: null }`         | Error: Value for member field {b} must be non-null  |
| `{ b: 123, c: "xyz" }`   | `{}`                    | Error: Unexpected field {c}                         |

> | `{ a: $a, b: $b }`       | `{ a: "abc" }`          | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |

Reviewer 9: Should `b` variable be included?

Author: No

> 

Reviewer 3: | `$var` | { a : "abc", b : 123 } | Error: Exactly one key must be specified |

> 

Reviewer 3: | `a : $var`                   | `{ var: "abc" }` | `{ a: "abc" }` |

for completeness on valid paths

> 

Author: Added :+1:

  does not provide a default value, the input object field definition's default
  value should be used.

Further, if the input object is a OneOf Input Object, the following additional
rules apply:

- If the input object literal or unordered map does not contain exactly one
  entry an error must be thrown.

- Within the input object literal or unordered map, if the single entry is
  {null} an error must be thrown.

- If the coerced unordered map does not contain exactly one entry an error must
  be thrown.

- If the value of the single entry in the coerced unordered map is {null} an

>   error must be thrown.

Reviewer 7: What's the difference between the first two conditions and the second two conditions?

Author: The first two apply before coercion, the second two apply after coercion.

Reviewer 4: See https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/825#discussion_r588879692 discussion there still seems somewhat open, pending input from @leebyron

  variable definition does not provide a default value, the input object field
  definition's default value should be used.

Further, if the input object is a _OneOf Input Object_, the following additional
rules apply:

- If the input object literal or unordered map does not contain exactly one
  entry an _execution error_ must be raised.

> - Within the input object literal or unordered map, if the single entry is the

Reviewer 5: same here?

Author: Copying [this comment from 2021](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/825#discussion_r588879692) here:

> These are already enforced by validation, so I do not know if we need them in coercion. However, if we do not enforce them here then the coercion table below would have different outputs (e.g. `{a: $a, b: $b}` with `{ "a": "abc" }` would be allowed by coercion, but not by validation).
> 
> An alternative approach is to keep the above and add a different non-null coerced value rule so we can drop the two rules below (since they'll be implicitly true).
> 
> @leebyron what are your thoughts on this?

  {null} literal or {null} an _execution error_ must be raised.

- If the coerced unordered map does not contain exactly one entry an _execution
  error_ must be raised.

- If the value of the single entry in the coerced unordered map is {null} an

>   _execution error_ must be raised.

Author: Copying [this discussion](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/825#discussion_r608894356) here so I can close it there:

> Evan: 🤔  why do we have basically the same rules twice, once for "unordered map" and once for "coerced unordered map"? Can this be simplified, or are we being explicit about something subtle?
> Benjie: See the [note above regarding validation](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/825/files/bb225f77781adfc23df14e391db5ee4a01d1eb6a#r588879692). These new bullets are _coercion_ (rather than validation) constraints; it's the ones above that we might want to remove.

  variable definition does not provide a default value, the input object field
  definition's default value should be used.

Further, if the input object is a _OneOf Input Object_, the following additional
rules apply:

- Prior to construction of the coerced map via the rules above: the value to be
  coerced must contain exactly one entry and that entry must not be {null} or
  the {null} literal, otherwise a _request error_ must be raised.

- The map resulting from the input coercion rules above must contain exactly one
  entry and the value for that entry must not be {null}, otherwise an _execution

>   error_ must be raised.

Author: @leebyron Hopefully this is simpler and yet covers all the cases it needs to?

| `{ b: 123 }`             | `{}`                    | `{ b: 123 }`                                        |
| `{ a: $var, b: 123 }`    | `{ var: null }`         | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |
| `{ a: $var, b: 123 }`    | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |
| `{ b: $var }`            | `{ var: 123 }`          | `{ b: 123 }`                                        |
| `$var`                   | `{ var: { b: 123 } }`   | `{ b: 123 }`                                        |
| `"abc123"`               | `{}`                    | Error: Incorrect value                              |
| `$var`                   | `{ var: "abc123" } }`   | Error: Incorrect value                              |
| `{ a: "abc", b: "123" }` | `{}`                    | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |
| `{ b: "123" }`           | `{}`                    | Error: Incorrect value for member field {b}         |
| `{ a: "abc" }`           | `{}`                    | `{ a: "abc" }`                                      |
| `{ b: $var }`            | `{}`                    | Error: Value for member field {b} must be specified |

> | `$var`                   | `{ var: { a: "abc" } }` | `{ a: "abc" }`                                      |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| `$var`                   | `{ var: { a: "abc" } }` | `{ a: "abc" }`                                      |
| `$var`                   | `{ var: {} }`           | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |
| `$var`                   | `{ var: { a: "abc", b: 123 } }` | Error: Exactly one key must be specified    |
| `$var`                   | `{ var: { a: null } }`  | Error: Value for member field {a} must be non-null  |
```

Reviewer 7: Assuming this matches the current proposal outlined in this PR, let's merge these additional samples to increase clarity.  If the PR changes, then we can update the samples to match.

Author: I've gone back through the previous recommendations too and have adopted many of them. I don't think we need to list every possible eventuality, e.g. if `{b:123}` works then `{a:"abc"}` should work - I don't think we need to list that.

| `{ a: "abc", b: "123" }` | `{}`                             | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |
| `{ b: "123" }`           | `{}`                             | Error: Incorrect value for member field {b}         |
| `$var`                   | `{ var: { b: "abc" } }`          | Error: Incorrect value for member field {b}         |
| `{ a: "abc" }`           | `{}`                             | `{ a: "abc" }`                                      |
| `{ b: $b }`              | `{}`                             | Error: Value for member field {b} must be specified |
| `$var`                   | `{ var: { a: "abc" } }`          | `{ a: "abc" }`                                      |
| `{ a: "abc", b: null }`  | `{}`                             | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |
| `{ b: $b }`              | `{ b: null }`                    | Error: Value for member field {b} must be non-null  |
| `{ b: 123, c: "xyz" }`   | `{}`                             | Error: Unexpected field {c}                         |
| `$var`                   | `{ var: { b: 123, c: "xyz" } }`  | Error: Unexpected field {c}                         |

> | `{ a: $a, b: $b }`       | `{ a: "abc" }`                   | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |

Reviewer 7: This item (line 1767) is listed exactly the same above on line 1748

Author: Good catch!

> | `{ a: $a, b: $b }`       | `{ a: "abc" }`                   | Error: Exactly one key must be specified            |

Author: ```suggestion
```

| `{ b: $var }`            | `{ var: null }`         | Error: {b} must be non-null.         |
| `{ b: 123, c: "xyz" }`   | `{}`                    | Error: Unexpected field {c}          |

Following are examples of input coercion for a OneOf Input Object type with a
`String` member field `a` and an `Int` member field `b`:

```graphql example

> input ExampleInputTagged @oneOf {

Author: Good catch; that clearly stuck around from the older PR!

- #733

   the original Input Object.
4. Any non-repeatable directives provided must not already apply to the original
   Input Object type.
5. The `@oneOf` directive must not be provided by an Input Object type

>    extension.

Reviewer 3: Why is this the case?  extend is useful for tooling to "create types" in a peicemeal fashion.  Not everyone needs to know all the details but it needs to be validated at the end at actual schema creation time

```
#fileA.graphqls
input Foo {
   a : String
}
```

```
#fileB.graphqls
extend input Foo @oneOf {
   b : String
}
```

The following once combined is valid surely?

Author: Twofold: it’s because a ”OneOf Input Object” may be constructed in a different way to traditional input objects (might use a different class or similar), and because if this was not the case then when the directive was added you’d have to go back and validate all previously added fields since they have different “potential to be invalid” text.

Reviewer 3: Hmm kinda feels like this is project an implementation into the spec situation.  

> it’s because a ”OneOf Input Object” may be constructed in a different way to traditional input objects (might use a different class or similar)

I would argue that the spec should not care how its implemented - sure it could be a new OneOfInputType class at implementation time (I toyed with this in graphql-java but rejected it as too much impact) but the spec shouldn't care.

> When the directive was added you’d have to go back and validate all previously added fields 

Again an implementation detail - not sure that the spec should care.

Even merging them seems straightforward since they are a non repeating directive

```
#fileA.graphqls
input Foo {
   a : String!
}
```

```
#fileB.graphqls
extend input Foo @oneOf {
   b : String
}
```

```
#fileC.graphqls
extend input Foo @oneOf {
   c : String
}
```

And implementation can merge these easily enough.

Right now the spec says about input types

```
extend input [Name] [Directives]opt [InputFieldsDefinition]
extend input [Name] [Directives]opt 
```

in other words it allows you to put extra directives on the input types

I just feel like this is an unnecessary restriction

Author: > I would argue that the spec should not care how its implemented - sure it could be a new OneOfInputType class at implementation time (I toyed with this in graphql-java but rejected it as too much impact) but the spec shouldn't care.

I agree, I'd argue that implementing Input Objects and OneOf Input Objects as the _same_ class in the implementation is an implementation detail that the space doesn't need to worry about 😉 

At one point, oneOf was going to be its own top-level type, like `oneof Foo { a: Int, b: Float }` rather than `input Foo @oneof { a: Int, b: Float }`. Would you feel the same if we had chosen the alternative syntax?

To me, a OneOf Input Object is a distinct type in GraphQL that happens to share a lot with Input Objects, but still has it's own distinct behaviors in many ways. As such, changing an Input Object into a OneOf Input Object would be like changing an Input Object into an Object for me - and that's not something I think the SDL should allow.

This is one of the arguments _against_ using the directive syntactical representation in my opinion, and encouraging using a keyword instead - to make the separation clearer.

> Again an implementation detail - not sure that the spec should care.

This second point is not an implementation detail, it's a spec detail - specifically it relates to lines 1724-1726 in `spec/Section 3 -- Type System.md` - that's the validation rules for the _definition_ of an `input` - if it's defined as `input Foo @oneOf` then additional rules apply. Then similar rules are applied on lines 1756-1759 for fields added via an _input type extension_. If we allow the directive to be added during an _input type extension_ then the previously performed rules in the _input type definition_ would now be invalidated and we'd need to re-check them; I can't think of a place where we've done this kind of back reference and re-validation in a similar part of the spec.

Reviewer 7: Along the same thoughts that @benjie is pointing out, I personally would say a different syntactical representation in the SDL would make it appear as a "distinct type", whereas since it is a directive, it is simply additional validation rules on top of the existing input object type.  Keep in mind that directives are described as such:

> A GraphQL schema describes directives which are used to annotate various parts of a GraphQL document as an indicator that they should be evaluated differently by a validator, executor, or client tool such as a code generator.

I think this definition fits `@oneOf`.  This PR also describes oneOf input objects as such:

> OneOf Input Objects are a special variant of Input Objects

So the way this PR is written, I see `@oneOf` as a predefined directive, just like `@skip` or `@include` or `@deprecated`, that converts the input object it is decorating into the 'special variant'.  As such, I would personally agree with @bbakerman in that the directive should be able to be applied anywhere it has always been, and hence the extra validation checks applied if the schema requires it after being merged.

Author: > OneOf Input Objects are a special variant of Input Objects

Indeed, they are a special variant. In my opinion you wouldn't take a broad thing and then turn it into a special variant at a later stage - it needs to be a special variant from the start. But this is my opinion, I'm happy to test it against the broader working group.

---

Imagine for a second that we didn't have input objects. You could imagine taking an object type and tagging it `@input`:

```graphql
type UserInput @input {
  id: ID!
  name: String!
  bio: String
}
```

This syntactic change could indicate:

1. that the type cannot have arguments on any fields
2. that the unwrapped type of each of the fields can only use scalars, enums, or other `@input` types
3. that the type cannot be used as the type of any field, other than a field on an `@input` type
4. that the type can now be used as the type of arguments

This is essentially the input object type at this point. But all we've done as annotated the existing object type with different validation logic and execution behaviors. Is the input object type really not distinct from the object type? Would turning an object type into an `@input` object type be a reasonable thing to do later down in the SDL? I, personally, don't think so. I think doing so would be extremely confusing for people reading the SDL - where something suddenly changes from one type of thing to another.

This, again, is one of the big issues that I have with using a directive to represent this distinct type. (I'm also in favour of using the directive because it's the smallest change, and allows it to be compatible with existing clients.) This constraint: that you can't add the directive in an extension, is my compromise - to allow us to leverage the benefits of using a directive without the footguns in terms of changing one thing into another at a later stage.

GraphQL implementations should provide the `@skip` and `@include` directives.

GraphQL implementations that support the type system definition language must
provide:

- the `@deprecated` directive if representing deprecated portions of the
  schema;

> - the `@oneOf` directive if representing types that require exactly one field

Reviewer: Technically, as written, this clause would immediately make all GraphQL schemas that have any exclusive input types Not Spec Compliant, since they "represent types that require exactly one field" but don't provide `@oneOf`.

I assume it doesn't matter in practice? But nominally it breaks the migration path.

> - the `@oneOf` directive if representing types that require exactly one field
>   (i.e. Oneof Input Objects) or fields that require exactly one argument (i.e.
>   Oneof Fields).

Author: ```suggestion
- the `@oneOf` directive if the schema contains Oneof Input Objects or Oneof Fields.
```

```graphql example
scalar UUID @specifiedBy(url: "https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4122")
```

### @oneOf

```graphql
directive @oneOf on INPUT_OBJECT
```

The `@oneOf` directive is used within the type system definition language to
indicate an Input Object is a OneOf Input Object.

```graphql example
input UserUniqueCondition @oneOf {
  id: ID
  username: String
  organizationAndEmail: OrganizationAndEmailInput
}
```

```graphql example

> type Query {

Author: Good catch! :flushed:

```graphql example
scalar UUID @specifiedBy(url: "https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4122")
```

### @oneOf

```graphql
directive @oneOf on INPUT_OBJECT
```

> The `@oneOf` directive is used within the type system definition language to
> indicate an Input Object is a OneOf Input Object.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The `@oneOf` _built-in directive_ is used within the type system definition
language to indicate an Input Object is a OneOf Input Object.
```
??

Author: Good call!
